CANIS INTERRUPTUS
We put him outside;
he claws the paint off the door.
We put him in the crate;
he howls.
We close the sliding partition;
he busts through.
We take no evasive action;
he's on the bed, wagging his tail,
shoving his nose
in the most noseworthy places.
We've tried the hedgehog, the squeaky lobster,
the double knotted rope.
And though these may sound like sex toys
they most definitely are not.

WAITING
I remember it was a game-blindfolded,
an adult handed me a broomstick,
turned me round until wobbly,
I swung a few times
then whack, I smacked la piñata,
candy and kids scattered everywhere,
hysterically
blinded by the bounty.
Also, blindfolded,
we played
touch & you're it:
arms extended, I grope air
teased by lunging giggles, reach
and miss
until finally I touch another kid,
and he's it.
These games, I understood.
This Lady Justice, blindfolded, I don't.
Was she kidnapped?
I'll pay her ransom
to get her back, to get her to drop the blindfold
so she can see again, and we don't
have to go far-no ISIS, al-Qaeda, Boko Haram-
in Albuquerque, Central Avenue, police murdered
Luis Montoya last night, and two others raped
Maria Quintana on the Westside mesa.
Lady Justice, you have a comfortable way
to inhabit time; in your righteousness,
understanding life only in terms of your darkness,
do you not feel an irremediable loss and sadness?
Yes, you live in darkness. Better to have those scales
stolen and melted in the furnace of a closed steel mill
into gold rings and bracelets for the wealthy
that ruin this country, rulers
who rent out jail cells to the poor,
corporate oligarchs who spread your legs
in judge's chambers and repeatedly fuck you.
You've lived in darkness too long,
time for the blindfolds to come off,
to look around at your people,
La Raza-who wander
in your shadow, homeless refugees
waiting for you to untie the knot and throw that rag
away, swing the razor-edged scales on that chain
as if they were weapons and cut and slice at injustice.
I can help.
I can teach you to take my hand
and dance. You don't have to be afraid,
you don't have to be in denial, we can both,
with three hundred million others,
teach you to see again, to sing and give you purpose
and a life again that explains why you are here
holding those golden scales as you do.
Right now,

those scales are weighed down-rusting away

holding Wall Street yachts in one-poor in the other-

Shake 'em! Shake 'em! Free 'em up!

As if you had a poisonous spider on your hand-

Shake it off! Shake it off!

So you can accurately weigh the weight

of my humanity against injustice, get the precise

reading of my suffering against their riches,

correctly measure my life's worth

and dreams for a better life

against corrupt judges and corporate oppressors;

turn your scales to catch the sun's reflection,

illuminate my dreams again with hope,

let your light rays shoot into the alleys,

jail cells, under bridges, hospitals, old-age homes,

food lines, on teenage sex-slaves and runaways

fucking privileged men for a hamburger and fries.

Wake the fuck up, Lady!

You've been in that pose out there

way too long, pretending to represent

people like me living week to week-

take a bath, brush your hair, look presentable,

there's a lot of us waiting for you,

and we can help you, just take that blindfold off

and throw away those sleeping pills

and see us.

We can help, we've been at it a long time,

and you can join us in the lines

marching, protesting, fasting, striking,

you don't have to be afraid: sure, you might

get bruised or gassed or pepper sprayed,

end up getting arrested and beat up,

but we can free you, we can make you feel alive

and vibrant, and we'll show you how beautiful

life can be, how much you're loved,

when you're with us, we're ready to help you.

I AM THE SHIT AKA USED TO BE / A BOP

my man slow down

drinking fast gets you high

look at those pitiful brothers across the street

they think shucking and jiving me

will get me to grease their palms with my pension check

i don't give money to lost causes

or to men whose idea of manhood is holding their dicks

listen i was never a want to be

chump change brother

who's content to exist

my life isn't about just getting by

that's why i served my country to get a free college education

i was an accountant

my man before i retired

i had an office a secretary who only reported to me

i was never on my knees begging

counting chump change

being grateful to exist

getting a woman was never a problem

i'd snap fingers & they'd come running to me

girls were grateful to be touched by my crown jewels

cause i was never on my knees

counting chump change

being grateful to exist

what's your hurry man

take this ten get you some more brews

i still have a lot of conversating to do

bro what took you so long

you had to make a pit stop

man slow down your drinking or start wearing depends

as i was saying all the women were after me

i decided to plant my seeds in a quiet educated church girl

we couldn't stay together cause she wanted me anchored to one bed

one woman can't satisfy me

i sent my kids money twice a month

they grew up in the brownstone i bought

my seeds knew nothing of food stamps welfare checks

you see

i was never on my knees

counting chump change counting brother

grateful to exist

i got to be truthful my son is an ungrateful son of a bitch

he had the guts to tell me i was never around

& i have no idea who he is

i put him through college and he talks crap

my daughter's different

she sends me cards

answers my calls

least i can do

is to help her pay rent

give her tuition money for my grandkids

you see i was never on my knees

begging to be loved

being satisfied just to exist

i'm tired

got to call my aide

the girl is missing a lot of brain cells

i don't complain about her

cause i'm afraid her agency will send me someone dumber

listen man take this five

wheel me to my door

you see brother

i was never on my knees begging

i never accepted b.s.

& definitely i'll never be grateful just to exist

BABY CAKES

Food is his heaven; abstinence his hell.

A neutered cat who shares his house without

mice or another pet, he tends to dwell

on what there is to eat. I bawl him out,

in sermons, calling gluttony a sin

punishable by death. I quote his vet.

A sideward glance suggests that I have been

hoodwinked by science. He knows how to get

his way through scolding or cajolery

in equal measures more or less. Besides,

I understand him, practically agree

that food is life while appetite derides

warnings from scientists or clergy that

too much to eat bodes ill for man or cat.

THE CAT'S FANCY

He knows-he knows-the sink is where I rinse

off dishes bound for the machine

that once it's filled will clean

them; years and years now daily he has seen

the process. Yet I can't convince

him by unsubtle hints

to take postprandial rests away from there.

And it has taken years for me

to figure out why he

chooses this spot. What he would have me see

is that china and silverware

can wait: better to share

myself with him, touch noses, smooth his fur

and thus make both our mornings happier.

GUYZ NIGHT OUT

My friend told me

he's got to move, the space

rent-free but the ceiling

so low, he bumps his head

when he's having sex or

when he's making love.

Much younger than I (or me,

as even educated Brits say),

he's old enough to make such

fine distinctions. I joked,

"Rent-free? When I was

your age, I would've died

for a coffin, rent-free."

Two happy drunks, we

discussed interspecies romance

& our issues with intimacy.

Right now, my wife's glaring at me

from the couch. I'm worried

she wasn't grateful to the

cop who drove me home.

FOR MY SISTER, THE FEMINIST

You told me

I can't imagine

what it's like

being a woman.

But I can

imagine being a horse,

a thoroughbred trained

against her nature

to leave the safety

of the herd.

I can imagine

being a spoon, a loaf

of bread, a hummingbird,

even a werewolf,

in-grown hairs & all.

Why not a woman?

Don't you remember

the night you woke up

sobbing & I left

my bed down the hall

to hold your hand

until you fell back to sleep?

THE ERRAND

At Spring Street on the edge of Chinatown,

a guy in an old car turned left into

my path. I yelled, watch out, and he rolled down

his window, shouted back, Oh, shut up. You

are so fucking stupid!

I was glad

he spoke, found a way to say hello

in a neighborhood filled with pictographs

I love but cannot read. The German roots,

sibilance in shut, closed vowel sounds

in fuck and up made me almost forget

why I was there.

Then I pictured my two-year-old

grandson pedaling his birthday gift;

how he would look up to tell me tanks,

eluded by the consonant-clustered thanks.

DEAR CUCK (FROM AN ADMIRER)

"Dear cuck," the queer email began,

"your verses are a monument

to doggerel. You are a man

spawned in an estaminet,

likely a faggot, ass-for-rent,

Jew or Jew-lover with a plan

to wrong what's right. Perverse & bent,

your soulless writing is a stain

on what is proper, sound, upright.

You do not know me, but I know

your kind. As Uncle Ez, our light,

wrote, 'Usury is cancer.' Blow

my eight-inch cock. I'll come for you

with tiki torch on seder night,

throw you from your bedroom window.

Daddy says, 'Might makes white makes right.'"

ODE TO ANTIQUES ROADSHOW

He looks like the kind of man who dries the dishes

each evening after dinner as he and his wife stand

at the sink, the dying light rinsing over their faces.



He hands the appraiser two vases, explains in a voice

like chipped crockery that his wife bought the vases,

but died before she could bring them to the Roadshow.



The appraiser says they are Bohemian Mantel Vases

made in about 1880, rare because of the scenic

images painted on them and worth about $4,000.



Now the man and the appraiser are both in tears.

I can't imagine the vases on my mantle, even if

I found them for $4 at the Wise Buys Thrift Store



on Holly Street, but I am in love with the man,

with the appraiser and the entire Roadshow audience.

In Tucson, I fall in love with the guy in the brown-



striped shirt who brings in a brown, blue and white-

striped Indian blanket that Kit Carson supposedly gave

to the man's grandmother, the foster child of a poor farmer.

The appraiser tells him it is a Navajo chief's blanket

made from hand-woven wool as fine as silk and says

it is a national treasure and worth maybe a half

million dollars. How much would it cost, what

would it be worth to run my hand over the stripes Kit Carson,

the grandmother and the Navajo chief once touched?

In Secaucus, a woman brings an early American

card table. She tells the Keno twins, Leigh and Leslie

(I can't tell them apart), that she bought the table

at a garage sale for twenty-five dollars. The brothers

are as excited as runners at the start line-in fact

they look like they could have run cross-country

track in college. Leigh, or maybe it's Leslie, says the table,

circa 1794, has a label with the maker's name, John Seymour.

The brothers crouch, show us the inlaid bell flowers

on the table legs and point to their elegant taper.

Luckily, the woman's cleaning efforts with linseed oil

and turpentine did not destroy the table's patina. By now

I know patina and provenance are as valuable as a blue

chip stock certificate. By now I know someone

will show up with a stone sculpture purchased as a relic

from the Yucatan jungle or a Fabergé egg from a guy

selling off his collection. Then the appraiser takes

us through the tricks of the making-things-look-old trade,

the art of making the not-real look real. I can sympathize

with such purchases. I've chosen a few things in my life

where the patina wore off and the provenance was over-

rated. If I were to visit the Antiques Roadshow, I would

bring the pottery jugs my father collected along the Mississippi

River from what was probably a saloon dump site.

The jugs are heavy, inscribed with Dutch words

of many letters and look like pieces from a still-life

painting of a table set for an evening meal of bread

and cheese. I know they are not valuable. I see some

on the internet remarkably like those I own. But I would

tell the story of how my dad came home from work

with boxes of jugs and bottles in his pickup,

how we girls listened and knew that life could-

at any moment-bring surprises. I would tell how

ten years later my father drowned in the river while

repairing flood-damaged bridges. Then I would

take the jugs back home.

A RIVER OF STARS

Look how things have turned around on the Criminal Deep State.

-Donald J. Trump

I visited, once, the Deep State,

with its marshy hills and dark swamps.

Nobody met me there-alone,

I guided myself along its abandoned roads,

the tree stumps contorted into the torsos

of long dead heroes, a sinkhole

every couple of miles or so kept me

on my toes. I spoke to a local who was

all eyes, no mouth or ears. He stared

at me in amazement, then sadness.

I found a church in the distance,

then the distance became the church.

There were bottle caps on the side

of the road, which I mistook for bottle caps.

Little circular molds to fit lies into.

A woman sat in a rocking chair; she

signaled that the train approached,

soundless. I moved away just in time,

and she beckoned me to her side.

"You don't want what you want," she said.

I didn't understand because I'm not

from the Deep State. She dropped her

chin, murmuring, "You should've come

yesterday." Everywhere there were men

hanging from trees by their neckties.

Naked women danced in red-lit rooms

of abandoned hotels; I approached one,

but she grew smaller with each step

I took toward her. I opened the door

and there was nothing in the room

except a warm red glow. Across

the street I could see men walking

into other rooms, then embraced by

other women who wouldn't shrink.

Above, time flowed on, a river of stars.

And in the bars, the cups were empty

of drink, though the patrons imbibed

to excess, stumbling over themselves,

three or four spiraling like tumbleweeds.

Across the vast, though arid, fields,

grungy farm workers planted tiny Bibles

like seeds in fruitless dirt. One smiled at me,

dumbly, as he bent up from his work.

OLD TIMES ON MAUI

Old times are the best.

Aren't they?

Old times rinse the fog of pain,

expose the pleasure, shining down

like sunlight from a star.

An old woman waits in front of a house

in which we both lived years ago, 'til

one thing led, 'til she pushed and I fell, naked,

to our bedroom floor, a swelling on my head.

But she only knows bruises of her own,

and she is wont to disremember,

remaining beautiful, dressed in her best,

which has seen its day, not yet descended

to shabbiness, to "Weren't you someone once?"

I watch her stand and stare. She was my wife.

She gazes up at windows

through which we viewed the sea.

She pictures the outside bath

where we once cleansed ourselves;

she wonders who bathes there now.

A tear forms in one eye.

She brushes back her hair.

Still tough, she will not cry,

but allows herself to love

briefly, before she turns away.

I need to tell this story

in a slightly different way.

She does not stand before this house.

Old times are the best. Aren't they?

She is me.

ENOCH

At Cascade Park,

where he'd busted

a street lamp once,

my friend John declared

I am Enoch reborn.

And it wasn't the weed

or the bottle of Seagram's

that caused him to turn

away from what he'd been

before, but conviction

& the way his father's belt

rose hillsides over his back.

After that, his voice

no longer lilted

or grappled with doubt.

He came & went

with the urgency

of a sailing stone.

Then disappeared.

Later I heard he'd moved

back to Sparks

with his folks & a sister

who loved to pray

in that showy way

bigots often do.

I often wondered if,

like wind does to clean linen

on the line,

she'd smothered him,

or his father.

Or whether he'd ascended-

all bones & crewcut,

frail as chicken wire-

to the heaven he'd never known

except in brief flashes

of sodium light.

Years later, when I gave

my son a parrot for his birthday,

I told him about John-

how I had a friend when I was young

who learned not to be afraid

by giving himself a name & took

the only thing willing to be claimed.

He became an architect, or custodian,

or roustabout, who knows, it didn't matter

because he was his own.

And my young son, understanding

already how much love

sometimes blinds

as much as it illuminates,

very clearly, in the way only innocents

can, said, I'll leave you too,

eventually.

HOW WE FIRST HANDLED BROTHER

This is 1988, we are black,

live in tenements, crazy

the only word to describe:

how "Da Butt" was a hit

song, Mike Tyson crashed

a Beamer and a Bentley-

how Brother bent over

the toilet, screamed,

nononono-believed

the shit inside

was his intestine. None knew

of melancholy, mania

extreme. Bipolar didn't mean

a thing-outside of T.V.,

couldn't explain why Monday,

Brother played basketball

with friends. Wednesday,

tattooed hell on his skin.

Friday, he broke

his MVP trophies.

Saturday, he woke-

was Brother. Sunday,

he sat in a corner,

just etched help

me in the walls.

Maybe if we'd had

a white picket fence,

Jesse'd been elected president,

mental didn't mean fragile,

survival didn't equate

with strength, we'd have

been more confident-

named it, have treated him

different. But this is 1988.

That's just shit. Crazy

is still a thing. The cure

for Brother: cover his scars

with salve, bond the broken

trophies, scrub scribble off

the walls, and pray

him to sleep.

SEEING MY FATHER'S PENIS

My father stood, and the black horn of himself slipped

through the fly of his boxers in our Floridian hotel room. Flaccid,

it looked like a mistake, gathered and external-

accidental. He was oblivious, walking between the queen beds,

while my sister and I sat giggling in Disney pajamas. This part

was not what I expected, dark skin folded under vulnerable skin

at the apex of his legs. At eight, my mind conjured a pink cartoon,

the relic of an animated film I borrowed from my local library.

The white women kept my card stored

in a small plastic box behind the children's desk. I loved watching

their manicured hands, flicking through the cardstock dividers,

fetching something only mine. The laminated card I'd signed

with amateur skill birthed a new freedom, my young mind teeming

with too many questions. I was ravenous for answers like a wolf pup

seeking carrion. In the room with my father, I had too long to inspect

his body, understood him knowing would mean shame. Rosie and I hid

under quilted covers, wordless and quaking with nervous laughter.

We took turns peeking out from beneath our homemade fort,

confirming it was still there

hanging in the air,

an apology.

FOUR HAIKU

sandblasted

by your words

petroglyphs

line of herons on the beach grunion

lemonade

that moment we know

the feeling is gone

power outage

the spread of neighborhood

quiet

THE SENTENCING OF DR. LARRY NASSAR

at the introduction

the one-on-one

semester starter

coffee table conference

my student second semester senior

econ major manicured

tells me that he's been

slaying

ample female bodies

and having a grand belly laugh

we are [a] similar

color and age and

he correctly assumes

sexual orientation

there is

he assumes again

an understanding between us

about the meaning of the word

slay

my student wants to talk

about conquest

asking nothing

he tips his cap to mine

he wants to see my grail

hear the ways

i talk about my grail

how many grails i have

owned counting

without counting

as they pile up

and are reduced to a verb

which is to say

a wink

which is to say

we flitter

in the comfort of our oneness

in the oneness of our

wounds aggression

in the oneness of our

reducing (so fluent)

all women to plunder

KMART'S CLOSING

and everything's on sale.

Even the bathmats look beleaguered,

aware of their uncertain future.

I buy a miniature plum tree at half price,

but when I get it to the car and place it

on the floorboard of the backseat, it looks

at me regretfully, like both of us are doomed.

Me and the plum tree done for.

Long gone are the blue light specials,

which could happen at any moment,

astound you with a flashing light and siren

right in the middle of a store.

I tell all this to the oldest man in my

mindfulness group. He listens,

like you'd expect him to, then shows me

a photo of a metallic butterfly that floated

just this morning right over his yard.

BUTTERFLY VALVE

Wiring the exhaust pipe

to the frame of the truck

is a skill I learned from my father.

He could keep a piece of shit

Ford or Chevy or Plymouth

running without repairs

longer than anyone I knew.

It was kind of a gift to himself,

keeping cash from the mechanic

for as long as possible. He'd

make do with a leaking gas tank

by not topping it off, or avoid

a 60 mile per hour

front end shimmy by driving 55.

As his children moved away

into lives of their own, the money

ran more freely. He gave up

lying on the street with

his shoulders wedged under

the chassis. He scheduled

regular automobile check-ups

where he'd sit out in the shop

with the wrench turners

and tell stories about how

he used to keep his junkers

running with bailing wire, heated

with cardboard in front

of the radiator, ignited with ether,

a screwdriver wedged

in the throat of the carburetor.

NOTHING IS FINE

Should you marry the perfect

person in wingtips or the cute

one everyone says will never

be marriage material? Good

question. Wrong answer.

My heart leaped, and God said

To have and to hold and do all

the right things. One boy, one girl,

scrape the weeds from between the

patio brick and make the sandwiches

with butter not mayo, spread all

the way to the edges.

Follow the advice of old aunties

who tell you to have a career to

fall back on because poetry

won't buy the groceries and the

city is no place to raise a child.

And stay home-they are

only young for a little while.

But along the way you forget

what you like for supper, and

every day is just like

last week and tomorrow and

you can't remember who your

favorite author is anymore.

Then one day the sunlight taps

her pointy finger on your

shoulder. Turn around quick and

look for Something with your

name on it-something that finally

lets you dream without fighting

battles in your sleep.

They say, "what do you want?"

Good question, but this isn't it,

and nothing is fine. Some

people know what they're going to

wear next Friday and look at

you like you should be satisfied

and not make waves and are "fully

vested," whatever that means.

If the pot of dreams you're

searching for isn't behind door

number three, what do you do

when the big four-oh demands:

"Come here now and be Somebody?"

Good question. Right answer.

Tell it you'll look forever

if you like and not settle

for the handy life, thank you

very much. And when you

finally come out of the

basement and into the glare,

no one will be strapped

to your back.

WHEN I MEET THE LAST TAUSHIRO

I ask him why his folk settled at the mouth of the Aucayacu River

instead of plodding north. He tells me they meant to live.

The conference begins & a man hands him a card. Several follow.

The day before, he'd gathered rainwater & buttered up some yucca

as he headed toward the mount. He prowled until nighttime, he believes.

I ask him why he won't satanize those who snub his fears & wants.

The last speaker of a language that forgoes p's & b's longs to teach us

his a's & c's. Last year, he met a woman who could muster a few sentences,

but not nearly enough for it to matter. He used to have a Bible in Taushiro

that "got stolen ages ago," he says. I ask him who translated it.

He doesn't need it anymore. He sings. He talks to himself & never forgets.

As a young man, he could climb a tree the way his mother taught him.

Nobody else for miles knew how to get those paltas from up there.

Yet he never fell. Ask anyone around. He could do it again, he thinks,

but only for a little while. It's getting late & he'll run out of game.

THE CONDITION OF WATER

Turning back toward home

on my after-breakfast walk

I face the steep hill of eucalyptus

that stands over our neighborhood

and am struck by the beauty

of what can hardly be seen

for today after heavy rain

the highest levels are obscured

like the truth of the Tao Te Ching

by the low-lying duvet of cloud

the farthest trees barely visible

looking remote as if ranged

on some twelfth-century Chinese scroll

Tell me! What is it in our

bicameral brain that makes

obfuscation of mere fact

so much more beautiful?

NEWLYWEDS

We leased it based on our impression

of the model-fully furnished, as if

page 37 of Pottery Barn's fall catalogue-

He carried me over the threshold,

and together we surveyed our empty rooms,

beige and white walls-

Ran our fingers through the bedroom's tan

Berber carpet-And laying naked, my head

on his chest, simultaneously noticed-

How the bedroom and closet doors opened-knob to ding knob-

collided into each other, so that neither

could fully open, unless the other was shut.

TIME OF MY LIFE

I wanted to be invited into music, if not

by the guy with a thick Brooklyn accent

and white tennis shoes carrying

watermelons, then by any other guy

my parents would've hated.

I wanted to be in the room

where the real dancing happened,

bodies moving together fluid

as breath, my eyes caught in the twirl

of Penny's dress, her whole body

moving in tandem with Johnny's,

maintaining at once space

and no space between them.

I wanted to lose myself like that

to my body. But I didn't want to be

Baby: a girl on a leash tethered loosely,

with enough money to vacation.

In some ways, though, I was her,

bearing the weight of expectation, believing

people to be good, the world

to be fair, that a girl can have everything

she wants as long as she's willing

to smile. And not understanding

why, back then, I wanted what I wanted,

each night I snuck out of my tucked-in

kitty covers, let my lips rove wildly around

my Dirty Dancing poster, my tongue

searching out Swayze's mouth.

What I didn't understand in the movie, I thought

I'd missed during truth or dare. Amanda dancing naked

on the picnic table, Katie doing push-ups

with eggs in her training bra. By the time we wriggled

into our sleeping bags, Penny was lying in bed,

Baby's father beside her. Watching again, all the blood

in this scene is gone-how had I imagined

so much blood? What did I know back then

about the body? At lunch the following Monday,

we snuck away, followed Amanda into the handicap stall,

circled her. I fidgeted, tracing grout between the pink tiles

that contained our irregular breaths, our Baby Soft

and Teen Spirit. Amanda took a swig of Coke,

all of us watching as she pulled the banana

from her brown bag, peeled it, slowly slid it

down her throat and swallowed soda. She pulled

the banana back out of her mouth in one piece,

and we applauded, cheered, exhaled. We were learning

lessons left and right. Mrs. K showed us how to insert

a tampon using her closed fist. We watched a cartoon girl

hug herself in a bay window, waiting for her cramps

to calm. The raw physicality, all of that blood in health class,

in our kitchens, coming out of our bodies. The dismembered

babies we saw on signs as our bus drove past Planned Parenthood.

Was this how the blood got into Penny's bed?

In the version of the Penny scene I remembered,

she was wearing a gold necklace with a saint's medal.

I don't know which saint, but in the scene, she

and Johnny prayed together, and a Rosary hung

on the wall behind her bed. Watching now, it's clearly

not a saint-just a thin gold chain with a tiny circle pendant.

In my childhood, Penny was forgiven

by whichever god she prayed to.

I was ashamed I was ashamed I was ashamed and

drove and drove and drove and then drove

home opened the test and the wait

was not long and opened the yellow pages

and drove alone and drove and drove

until nobody knew me

and the square brick building with the window

and the window with the neon-pink "free test" sign

and the woman on the brown couch under fluorescent

lights under a drop ceiling holding yellow baby booties

that she'd knitted as though she spent days praying

for pregnant girls and knitting these booties and humming

as they peed on sticks in the bathroom adjacent

In reverse order of importance:

My best friend from high school offered to be my Lamaze coach

The Lutheran woman who gave me the pastel yellow booties

The long walk back to the car holding those booties

NASCENT JANUARY, 2018, AFTER RAIN

What a disappointment this century has been-so far.

-David Bowie, 2012

This morning, after rain, I saw half a rainbow.

I mean, it aspired, it rose and spread and headed

higher, but instead banged into a cloud bank where

it got stopped dead.

The spread, though, was impressive,

bloody reds and purples and yellows, it was enough

rainbow for me. More rainbow would have asked me:

what color was your brief life.

TURBULENCE

I can't stop imagining my own death on airplanes. I buckle my seatbelt

and a propeller flies through the window and slices off my arm. I look

as my insides stream from the wound. If this doesn't happen then later

the plane will fall slowly and smash into a mountain. I am crushed

like a grape inside a fist. My mother asks me to text her every time

I board a plane. I never say I love you, only On the flight! Then

my mind begins the dirty work. Visualizing how this could

kill me. I read that flying is the safest way to cross distance. Safety

requires the accumulation of knowledge. My mother learned my father

was like two different people. His violence snuck up on him,

and neither of them saw it coming. In one moment, he'd fill the fridge

and the next BAM his fist would come crashing down. A split pomegranate

is how I picture my mother's scalp, before the stitches. Burst open.

I shouldn't say that like I was there. I was barely a year. It doesn't cost

my body to imagine. Not really. I know the body is fragile by what I learned

was done to my mother's. The price of a lesson: to describe

what happened so that it might not happen again. An SOS

in the sand. He lifted her up into the sky and held her there, gasping.

There it is again. I don't know what came over me. Sometimes,

you make me so angry I just lose control. The pilot loses control

and the whole plane rattles. I watch the babies cry. The last time

I saw my father was at an airport. Last can have so many meanings.

Final. Most recent. Endure. Please stay. I stay

ahead of all the ways I could hurt a person, and fly off before they happen.

The people I love say I leave and make them feel so far away.

I didn't mean to do that. I worry that if I feel too much I'll go mad

and set the world aflower with something utterly unpredictable.

Can you believe that? I am the stranger in the middle seat, bowed by turbulence,

gripping wildly in the dark for your hand. Whispering, will it hurt.

I don't want to die. I can see it so clearly.

Sometimes this happens. Sometimes the arm lashes out

in ways that feel almost instinctive. Please, don't take me

at my word. I always mean to say I'm sorry.

THE BLADES

In the new world, as the goddess dictated,

each time a man touched a woman against

her will, each time he exposed himself,

each time he whistled, dropped something

in her drink, photographed her in secret

she sprouted a wing from her spine. Not feathered,

like birds or angels, not cellular, translucent,

veined like dragonflies, but a wing

like a blade, like a sword hammered flat,

thin as paper. One wing per wrong.

At first, the women lamented. All their dresses

needed altering, their blankets shredded,

their own hair sliced off like a whisper

if it grew down their backs. And those

misused by fathers, bosses, drunken strangers

evening after evening were blade-ridden,

their statures curved downward like sorrow

under such weight. But this was not the old world

of red letters or mouthfuls of unspoken names,

not the old world of women folded

around their secrets like envelopes, of stark

rooms where men asked what they'd done

to deserve this. And the goddess whispered

to the women in their dreams, and they awakened,

startled, and knew the truth.

They pinned up their hair, walked out into the morning,

their blades glittering in the sun, sistering

them to each other. They searched for the woman

with the most blades, found her unable to stand,

left for dead, nearly crushed beneath the blades' weight.

They called her queen. They lifted her with hands

gentle as questions, flung her into the air,

saw her snap straight, beat the wings at last,

and they followed her, a swarm of them, terrible

and thrumming, to put the blades to use.

LONG DIVISION

Twenty percent of me wants women-

or maybe just Cardi B. I want us

to fuck up the club after we get dressed

at each other's houses, her jeweled tips

grazing my ribs as she drags the faja

tight beneath my breasts. I want her to call

me "bitch" because I'm taking too long to gel down

my edges, then later, try to fight the bitches

who get too close to me on the dancefloor.

I want us to stumble into the bathroom

arm in arm; for her to thumb straight

the smudged wings of my mascara,

gum cracking against her expensive

teeth, us taking in the breath from

each other's nostrils and the stench

of pissy toilets and bins brimming with pads

rolled tight as sushi. And all this

is to say: I am not ready to speak of her

peacock feather, of the ripple of muscle

coaxing it down her outer thigh, which is

to say: I don't know what I want- but maybe

more than twenty percent will allow.

Sixty-nine percent of me wants men;

I believe every mouth deserves a morsel.

The rest of me just wants a bed alone:

seas of unfucked stitches cool

to the touch, and arms brave enough

to lie open with no expectation of

an embrace. Of that, half is terrified of men:

of the intentions they hide between my fears,

the messages sitting on read, and the easy way

they are speaking to you, and suddenly,

they forget. Though part of me longs

for their forearms, for the way they lift me;

and the laps, broad as my mother's, granite enough

to hold me no matter what size I've become,

no matter the number of cylindrical months

I've spent alone, months the men moisten

and dangle in front of me like squares

between their lips. You can never finish a whole one

by yourself anyway, one used to say, lifting the butt,

it's filter red and warped from my slow drags.

The other half remembers always-and sometimes

with tenderness-my rapist. I see him in passing:

twice daily at 11:11-his wish minute. I see him

in razored goatees and in the rhombus

of a Toyota; in the belly, hard as a melon,

which is leading the man who is leading the girl

through a crosswalk littered with brief blushes

of dogwood blossoms blotting the spring rain.

Even now, I wonder if it happened because we were

in love, and if that's true, maybe I should just

get over it. Or call it some other thing:

the need for better safewords. The need

for more boundaries, unrecognized as they are:

little countries with shorelines for skirts

and no kings. Longing is an imprecise

arithmetic, like the medicines calculated

for both histoplasmosis and my survival.

If you sectioned off my heart, it would collapse

like shredded meat cupped between the loaves

of my sesamed lungs, where there is always more breath

than sustenance; still, some nights

I sit alone at the oak table at sunset,

daring my dissection in the cracked reflection

of an empty plate. Others I spend like the Savior's

parabolic bridegroom, who, having passed the sleeping maids

in the courtyard, enters the streets in his

sloshed robes, his kerosene lamp

whittled to a flicker against his chest.

He's calling "Come. Come. Whosoever,

let them hear; let them come."

LONELY, LOVELY

My friend, whose name is John,

he's not an everyman, this John,

he's a nowhere man,

though one could say

the nowhere man is every man

today.

John sips coffee and whisky

and says he likes to drive sixty

down dark curved country roads:

windows down, a softened radio,

an irrepressible impulse to go

somewhere.

But no matter how fast or far he goes,

he always ends up back at Monday.

And he's growing old with Mondays.

He's lost his soul to Mondays.

And there's just no getting

away.

John has kind brown eyes

that he closes when he plays guitar,

or thinks about things too hard,

and that happens more and more.

He never finished his college degree

or wrote all that intangible poetry,

the deepest deep down thing

inside him.

So Monday comes as it always does,

and John goes as he always must

down a long deserted road ending

in a factory and a guardhouse hut;

where through the odd hours of the night,

he guards tin foil: rolls and

rolls.

From whom or what God only knows.

But in his quiet guardhouse shack

John reads Ginsberg, Whitman, and Kerouac;

and should tin foil ever fall under attack,

his last thoughts would probably be

of Roman candles madly bursting free

or some such lonely, lovely thing

that lonely, lovely hearts to themselves

sing.

YOU DON'T LOOK LIKE SOMEONE

i am a stranger here

they have put me up in the fancy neighborhood and

when the alabaster white-haired fur coat woman

and her hesitant eyes hold the elevator for me and say

you don't look like someone who i've met before

centuries pass between the someone and the who

and my muscles tense as i arm myself

with explanations for my presence in her the building,

this learned response, survival staple

gray matter imprinted infographic:

"how to keep a white woman from panicking"

i am a guest artist

i'm only temporary

i leave in December

i explain myself (away):

i am not a threat i am not a threat

i am not a threat i am not a threat and

i wonder what else might've been

in the canyon between the someone and the who

you don't look like someone

who belongs here

you don't look like someone

who inherited all the world

you don't look like someone

who can pay these property taxes

really you look like the doorwoman

maybe you are her daughter, and forgot?

just a moment ago, our president was black but

you look like the doorwoman and

you don't look like someone

and there was a moment when, instead of explain, i might have flipped my extensions and YES GIRL i just moved in and girl don't you know i love it here! i'm never gonna leave, honey BELIEVE THAT! All clean and fancy up in here! where you get a coat like that? i want me a coat like that! girl, we finna TURN UP in this bitch! i'm finna tell my cousin 'bout this place. mmhmm, we movin right on up, you betta look at god 'cause won't he do it. y'all got some thin walls in this place tho. 'spensive as hell but y'all got some thin walls. you like Biggie? but isn't the ride always over before you even know what happened?

you don't look like someone

who

i've met before

and only later do i realize-

i could've

said the same to her

SOCCER DAD

So I have to sit through my son's soccer practice

for 45 minutes before the nine-year-olds gladiate

and step on each other's feet and take balls in the face

in the third game of the season and I think I'll bring

a poetry book to read no big deal nobody's gonna notice

well I've been reading along in this poetry book and it's a good

poetry book and I turn to a poem that includes a snake

and the snake is oiled/ slick like a male member slick

with the juices of the female or something to that effect

and I've got this book open, on my lap, thinking, Christ,

these good soccer moms and dads are gonna think I'm

some odd sort of pervert reading about a slick member

while sitting at a soccer game for nine-year-old boys

so I put the book down but I'm bored the practice is boring

the games are better it's a competition between your children

and other people's children which is the best way

to get the American parent interested in their children

that I know of so I decide to pick up the book again

and open to the next page and the title of the poem

is "Foreskin" good gravy how am I supposed to bring

a poetry book to soccer practice to enjoy in my own

private island of headspace not having to talk

to the other parents if emblazoned there at the top of the page

I'm reading that anybody can peek over and ask about is

"Foreskin" and I mean no disrespect to the poet

this poet was recommended as one of the greats

writing in American English today and she probably is

some of the poems earlier in the book really did

take the top of my head off in the way the ol' cat lady

said poetry ought to so the game starts my son's team

goes up 3-0 in the first quarter lickety split

then the other side gets a goal back in quarter two

then my son volunteers to play goalie which terrifies me

and he performs three hair raising saves two in the corner

by the post just before the ball crosses the goal line

and another by charging out into the thick of legs

around the penalty spot claiming the ball by diving on it

when the ball's on the other side of the field I call to him

"Oren!" and give him two thumbs up like I'm saying

which dad is proud of his son-this guy! definitely not

like I'm saying who wants the word "Foreskin" real big

in the book of poetry they're reading among the churchgoing

normies of Normaltown Indiana and Oren thumbs up back

and we're feeling pretty good till they get one lucky one

and then another because nobody on our team will get in the way

of the big boy on the other side and he crushes one from fairly close

range Oren didn't have a chance so after that second goal

he walks over to the sideline rips his goalie penny off

throws it on the ground kicks something and yells

and all the parents are awwwwing and oooohing and ahhhhing

look at that a nine-year-old throwing a fit cause he got scored

on twice and I was sad and all but not disappointed really

not upset who's going to begrudge a nine-year-old a fit

when a kid built like a truck has just crushed two balls past him

in quick succession and I kinda wanna take the pressure off my kid

and make him not the center of revulsion or pity or empathy

or whatever human emotions are being psychotransmorgrificationally

beamed in his direction so I open the poetry book

lay it on my lap plain as day in the 70 degree sunshine

look around at all the parents and go "can anybody tell me

what this word means?"

IN CHARLOTTESVILLE AFTER CHARLOTTESVILLE

Tonight they've hung up lights in lilts across 2nd

and Water Street on the downtown mall, a Christmas choir

singing Oh Holy Night-twenty-four people lined

against the painted brick wall, its peeling curls-the wall

Will knelt beside on one knee, face full of fear, a sidewalk of gum

and toppled ice cream, to ask if I could always call him

mine-the same wall we crouched against in August,

shielding our heads with our arms, our bags, our books,

whatever we brought along that might protect us

from the rocks and spit they threw,

their emptied tear gas canisters hurled by arms roaring

with blood, their faces doing that angry Goya thing

with the colors. My mother called hours

after Heather breathed last, called

to make sure our front door was locked;

that I remembered tomorrow was a Holy Day

of Obligation, and if I didn't go to church it would be

a mortal sin. Her own version of danger. That time in August

flowers weren't blooming but there was one frail rose

on our rented front yard, and we could see it

from the upstairs window, the rose, but also

the gunmetal gray Dodge, plate GVF 1111, three houses

down, abandoned and blood-caked from taking

Heather's life and mowing over others, full throttle forward

then revved into reverse, the steel front bumper

severed, like two arms bent, palms up

and sorry. A car to take a person places, not to take

someone away, and at the window Will became more beautiful

to me, his fingers on the glass, all of them his. Now, sort of,

mine too. The driver ran into the woods to crouch

and hide out like a squirrel. We walked our dog

through those woods that morning, green

and lush, as if beauty's sole defense

is to always just be beautiful. On that Feast of the Assumption

Charlottesville opened their eyes as if a body

punctured. Tiki torches on fire. Adult children playing

with their fathers' guns. There is a sound a body makes

when bounced off the hood of a car

that no one should hear. Tonight snow falls

peacefully, and the choir sings Fall

on your knees, and because we have nothing else to give, we do.

WILL EXULT OVER YOU WITH LOUD SINGING

That's my dad, I say, pointing to the man in the photograph

with thin grey hair reflecting river-light.

And that's my mom. My arch of nose, my chin.

I'm talking to my children, talking the way I do

about things that are not lost, that are still here,

knowing that it's no use, that time and decay

do not obey language; that the dumb flesh of a tree,

for instance, doesn't care about Samantha,

which word my son, ten years from now,

will carve into it;

doesn't distinguish between the pain of his love for her,

and any old pain: woodpecker, beetle, axe, frost, flame.

Once, when I said she could not play

with a dead mouse, my daughter wailed so loud

I thought she might break.

This was in Great Falls, next to a riverbank

wafted with small blue moths. We'd strayed

from the playground near an overpass where people

seemed to be sleeping or hovering around fires.

She yelled Mine, astounding even herself, as if at the end

of the scream she thought there might be nothing left,

nothing of her,

nothing to listen to in this world.

The sad mechanic exercise

My mother was finishing a master's degree

in psychiatric nursing, writing a thesis

on gambling addiction, on people who wear diapers

so they can stay at slot machines for hours,

even days,

and when we asked her if we should try

to get the last course waived and the degree granted

before it was too late, she said nothing,

as if keeping new and hidden counsel

with herself, or with someone not present.

And my father,

dead ten years later of a heart attack

in the bathroom of a movie theatre-the ticket-taker

panting out that sad mechanic CPR-he must have felt

a terrible silence growing inside him, or a noise

too loud to hear, the crashing stillness after

a long inertia, the indifference

of that small wet machine suddenly reluctant to bear

for one more second

the weight of his body. As if the soul

at the end of a long journey

finally stepped through a door and put down its luggage.

Thinking, maybe, if he listened hard enough

he could make out

why stars had lost their willingness to dazzle,

or where they were going-through what dark nimbus

or invisible crack-and why without him,

why so fast.

Once as a child I drove a hammer's claw into

the trunk of one of the small maples

lining our driveway,

peeling bark away in strips as thick as fingers

to the underflesh, the soft wet honey-gold,

tinted a bit off-pink, off-green.

It was like being, or imagining that I could be,

everywhere at once, light

right there in the palm of my hand,

made still and, well,

mine,

in ruins. Light's unsingable psalm,

a thing outside

our sad economy of come and go.

A brief end to stagnation, briefly glimpsed.

My father was angry, but mostly bewildered.

He stared for a while, then said only

that the hammer wasn't mine to take, and that the tree

wasn't mine to do whatever I thought I was doing to it.

And what are you doing to it, he said, and I said

I don't know.

Poor flesh, love says, baring her teeth.

Poor agitation of heat, of stars, shaking and far away.

Van Gogh in the final letter to his brother Theo:

Well, my own work,

I am risking my life for it and my reason

has half foundered because of it-that's all right.

It's true no metaphor can save us, store us

like gravel in the cheek of Hallelujah Creek,

Creek of Unclottable Light.

But that's alright.

Why not exist, at least for each other,

in love and thickly streaked and made to end,

believing if not everything at least

one of the minor prophets, maybe,

Zephaniah: he will rejoice over you with gladness;

he will quiet you by his love;

he will exult over you with loud singing.

That's my mom I say to my kids,

that look she has like mine, of somebody enduring

happiness, expecting grief. And that, I say,

is her diploma, framed and hanging on the wall.

This is your breakfast, bananas and toast and jam,

our one life, ours in the only sense

that matters, something that we make … make what?

Come forth, I think,

like stars, all flicker and distance, prodigal and dim,

but not so dim that if they vanished

we would not weep every night,

or stop trying, though we knew we couldn't,

to describe them,

to remember.

TO THE INSURANCE AGENT WHO, IN DENYING COVERAGE, EXPLAINED THAT EVERYTHING HAPPENS FOR A REASON

During the Christianity wars in Paris 1572,

three Huguenots were skewered on a spit

and roasted. They happened to be children

and siblings, two brothers and a sister.

And it was the Will or Holy Plan of God

that they would die this way. For the girl,

if she were allowed to come into womanhood

one day, would take seed and give birth

to the Antichrist who would destroy Christianity

for evermore. That was the thought. The Catholic

shoe mender who lured the children into his home,

the man who would save the world,

cranked the spit and had no further

context of the extravagant display of his crime

-for which the angels in the echelons

would take up their terrible horn and siren voices

to equally praise and condemn for eternity.

He could feel God moving through

his hands, he would later describe to others

who simply saw him as a psychopath

before the word for that condition was invented.

And as with another thing their brains

were not equipped to identify: it was loneliness

that motivated his actions and not God at all,

unless God was loneliness, as he must be.

And if you find yourself confused

by this little narrative, remember

that to have faith is to believe

as the shoe mender did in his innocence,

or to come closer to the same fire

and take some comfort there.

THE DEAD WEIGHT OF DOGS

I come every other day to check on them.

It's not enough, but I don't want to

be around their falling, and vomit, and chronic diseases.

So I visit, stop by to help, do what I can.

Maude is ninety-two, and strong for her age

but too visually impaired to drive. My cousin is fifty,

and has an affliction in her immune system.

It's a curse. It makes me believe in the devil.

It makes me afraid for myself. Any one of us

could get caught and not be able to escape.

It's how we're made, cell by cell.

The fridge is broken. She can't afford microwavable food,

or Coke, the one thing that revives my cousin

enough to rise from her chair, weightless as origami,

and smooth Maude's balding head, and find where

she has hidden her black-market narcotics in her dark,

cluttered house, antiques piled to the ceiling, snug under dust.

One day I will come and the disaster will be too big

for me to handle, but I don't think it is today.

Today I have come to bury her dog.

I am needed in a hurry, Maude tells me over the phone,

to dig a hole for Dutch.

Maude is practical. She thinks straight, keeps safe.

She sticks a brick in the gap in the fence

where the little dog could slip out onto the street.

She knows how many ways there are to get killed

by a single over-looked detail.

The world is very big but the specifics are small.

I wouldn't want to know them all like Maude.

I don't think it is very warm to sleep next to my cousin

but that's where Dutch stayed curled in her mistress's

fetid smell like they were a pair of miniature wolves,

their tails tucked around the ball of themselves,

a physical need as good as a drink of water.

The way it happened is, Dutch went out to poop,

and took too long. They both thought the brick

must be knocked over.

Even though they were sure Dutch was too small

to nudge it out of the way, they had to admit,

she wanted out just as much as any dog.

It wasn't a car. It was the neighbor across the street.

He lives alone and senility is working on him

like an infestation of tiny roaches

that swarm when the lights go out.

Dutch! Dutch! My cousin stood in the driveway

and called. Yap, yap, yappy, little dog couldn't stop

barking at the old man checking his mail,

and so he kicked her hard, and sent her flying.

She hit the road running back to my cousin

just as far as her internal injury would let her go.

She dropped half-dead in the middle of the road.

Asshole! My cousin yelled.

Maybe it made her neighbor feel better

to know he could still kill something.

He turned like nothing had happened

and went inside. Maybe he was carrying

his Publisher's Clearing House letter

that said he might already be a winner.

Maude noticed the dog's belly swelling.

She knew exactly what that meant.

My cousin picked up her dog in a hurry

to get to the vet, and then it was done,

before the car door was even open.

Dutch was gone, and there was nothing

Maude could say that could help even a little.

My cousin is in the living room crying.

She holds her dog like another piece of refuse

from her unlucky life.

Maude empties out her late husband's small, red

toolbox, and my cousin wraps Dutch in dog blankets

and sets her inside looking up like a cuddled child

in its coffin. Then it is left to me. I close the lid,

and carry Dutch out to the daylily bed.

The two of them stay in the kitchen.

The funeral is too sudden, but they watch me

from the window. I'm sorry, I say to Dutch,

and to God. It is my prayer, and I mean it.

My cousin's dog has a soul. I feel ashamed

of my narrow, lukewarm, every other day duty.

I could have loved very well if I were as pure as a dog.

It took my cousin all night to think of

what else she had left in the world to live for.

Maybe she thought of Maude.

Maybe it was my next visit.

THE WAY

The fourth leg

of the dog

with now only three

was the

in-the-way one

he'd lift

in order to pee.
