HOW TO DATE A WHITE BOY
Never be the first. You are no one's
enigma or experiment. Find evidence
an old photo online, in a dusty shoebox
under his bed. Do not be his melanated
test drive. Do not feel flattered.
If you meet his parents, prepare
for disappointment. You will want
them to be pleased with your philosophy
thesis your grandma's pearls. You will
hope they are immediately rude so you
do not waste another fertile year on their
son. They will invite you to a cookout (they
will call it a barbeque, but it will be a cookout).
Don't get too upset when you overhear
the grandmother say you are darker smarter
prettier more or less articulate than expected.
She will be dead before the wedding if there is one.
So, you've fallen in love. Remind him
before you create a joint Instagram
account, before you adopt a shelter
dog, remind him that you wear the same
MAC foundation number as Sandra Bland.
That your brother looked like Tamir when
he was little. Before you argue names for
imagined children, remind him of what
could happen to a boy with your face.
So, your white boy thinks you should move
in together. Take him to un-gentrified Bronx
neighborhoods where old men play dominoes
on the sidewalk and children have no bedtimes
in summer. Take him to your favorite auntie's
house. Let him get a tongue lashing from your
Hotep cousin while you "help" in the kitchen
by taste-testing arroz con pollo collards quinoa salad.
So, your white boy has fallen in love with you.
He has told off Johnnie Come Woke-ly friends.
He is asking whether you have ever thought it
would be easier with someone browner than him,
whether your parents, best friend, your abuelita
would be happier. Hold his hands in yours. Notice
his red face, tear-filled eyes. Tell him the truth.

MISREADING DARWIN
He lived not only his own life,
he lived also in the lives of others.
Chemistry, the Cultural Approach
We didn't have to do experiments, we just had to think about them,
and that's my method still.
I don't like specimens. I like shelving. Not collecting but collections.
The way Darwin said he abhorred the sea, every wave and slap,
the whole five years, but loved his tiny cabin beneath the poop deck,
with its nooks
and crannies and clever drawers, though of course
he was really out there, too, scrambling over rocks and skinning iguanas.
He could do it all: geology, zoology, botany.
Back home in County Kent he spent the mornings in his study
surrounded by his books and instruments.
He loved to write on foolscap. Sometimes a sentence. Sometimes a word.
He wasn't an atheist. He was just very, very slow.
He was polite.
I am the vine, you are the branches, as Buzz Aldrin said from the moon,
after the Eagle landed.
But this was off-mic, of course. He was quoting Jesus.
Cartoon Eyes
Darwin wrote sitting on a chair
with a board spread across his lap.
He was always sending his children out
to collect beetles and report on the pigeons,
and he was always asking farmers
what they had seen and what they knew,
and shopkeepers, and the postman.
Anybody. He was interested.
I have a laptop, of course,
and so I often write in chairs.
Yesterday what I saw was a bushtit
fluttering in the ivy,
and when I went to investigate
I saw that it couldn't fly anymore.
It was injured and hiding.
It looked right at me, blinking
the two black dots of its eyes,
and as it blinked
nothing else on its body moved.
It was otherwise still.
I think it knew me.
I think it knew it was dying.
Addendum to My First Poem about Darwin
When I say that Darwin wasn't an atheist
I just mean that he seems like such a nice man.
He was shy. He was sad. He was flatulent-
that's why he always excused himself after dinner.
He spent eight years studying barnacles,
everything about them, until he was the world's expert
on barnacles, all the different kinds,
with all their hard shells and their soft, creamy bodies.
He loved to walk in his garden,
admiring the trees, but only at the appointed time.
His house was the ship and his wife
was the captain and he was the voyager,
alone with his thoughts every day, filling page after page.
The children told time by the creak of his door-
though they were always racing in, too,
stealing a rock or a feather, and he let them,
and sometimes he played with them or took them
in his arms and kissed them on the ears,
and when his little Annie died he so forgot himself
in a letter to a friend he called her a little angel.
An angel. He just couldn't believe
she was gone. He just wasn't thinking.
On the Surface
Darwin married his cousin, Emma,
and later came to love her dearly.
I met Barb in the band-she played the drums
and I played the clarinet-
and I loved her from the start.
After their second child died, the youngest,
a boy, Darwin bought a billiard table.
He researched it thoroughly first
and bought the best, and he liked to play
as he was thinking,
banking shots off the soft, velvet edges.
My brother and I used to play pool
down at Gazebos, in a shadowy corner
beneath a big hanging light,
the felt a brilliant, emerald green,
but I never sat at the bar until a week
after Barb and I were married.
I'd just turned twenty-one and Dad
bought me a beer
and we sat and talked. It was surreal.
It just didn't seem possible.
Everything was still on the surface.
My Mystery Bird
At Nestucca once I saw a Swainson's Thrush sing,
but I had to live there first, for a month, in the alder above the bay.
It was chilly and damp in the morning, and I was very lonely,
but I had my little coffee pot, and my Post-it-Notes
flew like flags, and finally I saw it happening, early one evening,
lit by the sun, the way they tip back their heads
and let the song pour forth, their soft throats bubbling.
Now there's this mystery bird in my neighbor's yard across the street,
singing in the blackberries. It could be
a Black-throated Gray Warbler, or a Hermit Warbler, or even
a Townsend's, but there's no way to know unless I actually see it,
unless I can stand on the road and wait,
looking into the thorns, while the cars drive by and the world goes on,
and I do. Minutes at a time. I want to see this one, too.
The way my brother says he feels the wine slide down his throat
when he drinks from the cup at mass.
The way he says he can feel it: that warmth. That burning.

POETRY
Right now we're polyamorous. I've witnessed her
leaving our home in "come fuck me" heels. I told her
my only rule is that she doesn't do it in our bed.
She suggested I watch her make love with someone else.
I'm not doing that. I have to find my own way with her.
The thing about Poetry is that she's got a great ass
and great legs. Her curves show me the relationship between
calculus, geometry and sex. With her, I'm constantly
seeing the connections between things that look like
they have nothing to do with each other. I love her for that.
She recently told me that I'm beginning to bore her,
that she's not sure we're meant to be together, but
she said she's trying to hang in there with me. I told her
that most of the time I don't know where she's coming from,
that she's confusing and often all over the place.
She told me I was supposed to love her mystery.
I was frustrated, so I laughed, which I sometimes do
when I'm frustrated. She rolled her eyes and said she was the best
thing that ever happened to me. I told her she wasn't open
to letting me be myself. She said she was plenty open,
that I was the one who was closed. She said I loved plopping
fences in rolling fields designed by nature to run naked in.
I told her she didn't know who I was. I don't know who you are?
Then tell me who you are, she said. But don't preach to me
like I'm some kind of idiot. Speak to me like you know
I'll understand you, and if I don't understand you,
I'll feel you. That's why I'm here.

TWO LOVERS STANDING ON THE EAST RIVER PROMENADE, THE WHITE ONE CAREFULLY PICKING THINGS OUT OF THE UNCOMBED AFRO OF THE BLACK ONE
The clouds over them were simple, perfect and white
like those that second graders draw over rooftops.
A plane descended towards LaGuardia Airport,
so slowly it seemed suspended above their heads,
almost as if the passengers had asked the pilots to idle,
while they passed around binoculars to look at their two
fellow men planted below, one looking for something in the other.
The white one stood firmly behind the black one in the same
patch of earth while runners, walkers and parents with strollers
swerved to avoid them. They appeared to have no awareness
of the movement surrounding them, not even the crisp, fall breeze
leaving the river and blowing their shirts around like the flags
standing outside the United Nations building farther north.
The water next to the promenade flowed in its usual ambivalence,
going upriver one moment, downriver the next, sometimes whirlpooling
salty water from the Atlantic Ocean peppered with fresh water
from the Harlem River, a blue gray green mixture masquerading,
passing as a river. Minutes ticked by. Neither said a word to the other,
as the white one peered through bushy, ebony hair,
while the black one stood with his eyes closed.

NEW NEGROES
Or saltwater negroes is what they called African
slaves who had been in America for less
than two months, about the length of time
it took slavery to break them. New negroes spoke
no English, were more prone to rebellion and running
away than the others. When they escaped,
slave catchers and Native Americans were rewarded
more money for capturing them the longer
they had been free. They were given the best money
if they brought back their scalps with the ears attached
to be displayed to the others with great effect.
Fatima, one of the new negroes, had grown
accustomed to ears and scalps dangling
from sticks speared into the ground.
What she found unbearable was the sun,
shyly rising each day, smoothing a reluctant smile
across her face before gently stroking her eyelids awake,
then brutally bearing down on her by midday,
flattening every inch of her into the numbest,
dumbest person in the world, and the soil,
cool and moist underneath, that tricked her daily
when she was delirious with exhaustion into thinking her hands
were in a river where she was preparing to bathe herself.
Before she knew it, she disrobed each day at dusk in the middle
of the field until a compassionate hand woke her.
The sun that caresses then bludgeons the soil that
carries a river and bodies forgetting to feel and then
remembering the night that keeps coming and the light
that keeps returning.

COMFORTS
You used to write about the snow.
How you would sit before a fire
relishing Bach. Distilled desire
attended you. Nowhere to go,
Nothing to do but stroke the cat.
Your comforts were well understood.
Your cat and you are gone for good.
There is small comfort now in that.
I've read your poems since you died.
I know the tale they had to tell.
You knew what waited all too well.
That snow is piling up outside.
You knew that soon enough you'd go.
But you rejoiced in Bach, the fire,
the cat. Your poems proclaim desire
attained. Your poems defy the snow.

CANVASSER
And in the middle of my grief
a puddle-
and in the middle of a puddle
a penny-
and in the middle of the penny
a president-
and in the middle of that president
a bullet-
and in the middle of that bullet
a wound-
and in the middle of that wound
another wound-
and in the middle of our wound
a night of splinters-
and in the middle of the night
a knock-
and in the middle of a knock
a go away-no one lives here-
and in the middle of away
a clothespin-
and in the middle of the clothespin
a wet field
filled with black-eyed Susans
a thousand traffic cones
or, a thousand yellow traffic lights,
their lights punched out.
in the middle of the field
a sinkhole-
in the middle of the sinkhole
a question-
and in the middle of the answer
a silence-
and in the middle of that silence.

STRANGE ODE
I wanted love so badly
I flew to Cedar Rapids
to stay with a man I barely knew,
and when I arrived at his house,
we chatted for a bit, and he poured
us each a glass of wine and after
a few sips asked if I'd pee
on his head. He was a psychologist,
so I hoped he was joking.
We'd met in a bar in San Francisco
I was often in a bar in those days,
as if love lived there.
My father was an alcoholic,
and my mother had just died,
and looking back at who I was then,
I realize I was crazy from grief.
But at the time I didn't know what
I was doing, and a stranger had asked
a strange question. "In the kitchen?"
I asked, because that's where we were,
my small suitcase next to the chair.
No, the man said. In the shower.
I glanced into the living room: dark wood floor,
dark furniture, drapes closed in midafternoon.
Fear zithered my ribcage. I hadn't told anyone
where I was. This man could kill me and bury me
in his backyard, and no one would ever find out.
I think you'd enjoy it, he said.
And if you'd like me to, I can also pee
on your head. No, thanks.
I tried to chuckle, but it sounded
like a chicken bone
was stabbing my larynx.
We went for a drive through a beautiful forest
by a river to his parents' house. The father
wore a blue seersucker suit, and the mother's dress
was patterned with peonies. His parents
were so kind I felt like I was their daughter.
When they asked about my family,
I said my mother had died in a car accident,
and while I cried, no one said anything
until I was able to stop. The mother held
my hand the whole time. After dinner,
her son and I sat in the backyard
eating ice cream.
I'd never seen fireflies before.
They made a gold constellation
like a sky of stars beneath the stars.
When we got back to his place, we put on
our pajamas and went to bed. He held me
close and told stories from his childhood.
Shower? he asked.
I said the fireflies were good enough.
In the morning, I decided to go home,
so he changed the ticket. At the airport,
he gave me a wrapped present, saying it
was something for my journey. As the plane
lifted off, I opened the package, a book:
You Can Be Happy No Matter What,
and I couldn't put it down.

SUN ON YOUR SHOULDERS
May this reckless, sum of summer freckles kiss by kiss become a necklace.

SKY BLUE
That summer after high school we did nothing
of use to anyone. We stole fruit from neighborhood
trees-plums on forty-second cherries on thirty-fifth grapefruits
on forty-seventh for throwing off the Sac State parking structure.
Some of us were going to college, and some of us
weren't. We skateboarded along the flat streets
of Sacramento under the hundred-degree sun,
the kind of sun that turns ice water into heaven.
We skated on the steps behind Fremont Presbyterian
until the pastor chased us away. David was the best
among us, would do things I was too scared to do.
He landed a switch frontside flip off a nine-stair,
and if you know what that means you know
it is something to see. That night we threw a party
at David's house-his parents didn't care
about alcohol. For no apparent reason
a girl named Lauren led me by the hand
to the garage and stuck her tongue in my mouth.
I was thinking I'd finally stumbled onto some luck
but then she pulled away. She said God was watching.
Even here in the garage? I said, but it was clear
she'd made up her mind. So we played ping pong.
She was in the process of beating me handily
when we heard screeching tires out front,
so I told her we'd call it a draw and out we went.
In the middle of the street was a sky-blue
Toyota Camry, just like the one my parents had.
A middle-aged woman stepped out and
bent down to look under her car. Under her car
was David, not moving, his neck making
a strange angle. The woman had her fingers
forked into her hair, and she kept silently
opening and closing her mouth
like a fish. When the autopsy came back
we learned that before being run over
he'd already died of a heroin overdose, right there
in the street. Maybe he'd been looking up
at the stars as the drug gently coaxed him
to stop breathing. I still think of that woman
in the sky-blue Camry and the nights
she must have spent believing
she had killed a boy
before finding out she'd just
run over something
that was already dead.

FULL DISCLOSURE
I keep many secrets
I'm going to tell a few
You will know me better
Though still I won't know you
A process much like praying
Though we don't need a pew
And we'll really never finish
We'll always keep a few
I'm tired more than yesterday
Exhaustion simply grew
Now that you are older
You may feel it too
Do dear friends really know me
Perhaps, just one or two
Not completely because I hide
Like others in the zoo
Most important, I'm an alien
Here to spy on you
Report back to my people
They're energy, like you
There, that is the big one
We were separate as we grew
Now carrot and potato
We swim in the same stew
Now you know me better
What I say may be true
But when you tap my shoulder
We still ask each other who

SIT ON MY LAP, I'LL SHOW YOU HAPPILY EVER AFTER
He likes me to sit on his lap.
Sit on his lap.
I squirm around. He likes it. He likes to spank me.
Let him spank you.
He likes it when I do cartwheels.
Do cartwheels in your white dress with strawberries.
In the truck he puts his hand on my knee.
He's giving you a ride to work? Shut up.
He puts his hand under my dress. I hate waitressing.
Lots of girls have worse. Judy's been fucked by her uncle.
Now that's bad.
He pinches my butt and puts his fingers in my panties.
Be grateful you have a job.
I'm going to college.
You think things are better in college? Trust me,
elbow patches instead of coveralls.
The professor put his tongue in my mouth.
Quit complaining.
The professor pulled up my skirt. He had me bending over the desk.
It could be worse.
How could it be worse?
He could be raping you.
How is he not raping me?
Seriously? Are you asking me this? You leaned over the desk.
Were you raped?
Honey, everyone's been raped. Everyone's been felt up. Everyone's had their ass pinched. Everyone's had some man do them when they weren't into it. Everyone's been fucked in their sleep. Everyone's had a man look at them like they're an animal. And then when you get old, like me, you dream of being screwed. Because no one wants you up any more. No one whistles or feels you up, no one taps on your window at night. No one taps.
I've met a guy, and he treats me nice.
Sounds boring. But good for you if you're into that sort of thing.
He's a sweetheart.
Make sure he isn't into porn. Most guys who seem nice are into porn.
He isn't into porn. He's into me.
Sure.
We're getting married.
Good for you.
The money's tight; the kids need stuff.
Get another job.
And he doesn't want sex any more. He just watches porn.
Blow your boss. Get a raise.
Are you crazy?
Men help girls they're blowing.
I got the raise. It wasn't too bad. It's just once a week. And he doesn't even smell.
Does your husband smell?
A bit. Sometimes. He sweats.
Does your husband know?
Of course not.
Good then. That worked out great.
I'm going to be vice president.
What did that cost you?
Anal.
I've never had to go that far. In the old days it was all about blowjobs.
I'm taking care of my family.
Good for you.
I'm still having sex with Paul. When he wants to.
It would be silly not to.
When does it stop?
Girls stay better looking longer now. It used to be thirty. Now it's fifty.
I'm nearly there now.
You're nearly where?
The safe zone. The hands-free zone.
The happily ever after zone. You're going to live happily ever after.

THE PURSE
Just dump it,
she said
to herself. It's
the only way.
She had
ten minutes,
ten minutes
after four years
of rushing:
work diaper home dinner bath doctor.
Now
was the moment
to clean her purse.
The purple
matchbox car
hit the table
hardest.
Flanked by bits
of crayon
and straw wrappers,
errant pencil tips
and battered
baby barrettes were
the sweaty remains
of the morning's
pre pre-K
peanut butter
on pumpernickel
and
a nearly empty,
ink-stained bottle
of hand sanitizer.
Nothing was hers.
Nothing.
Not the
crumpled bill given
to her daughter
and then jammed
into the purse
to keep it safe.
Not the
spare Spiderman socks.
Not even, really,
the sapphire
set in gold,
an heirloom
from her mother-in-law,
she had removed
when she learned
how easily
fine hair catches
in filigree.
And
the blue book.
What was that?
It wasn't
a child's book.
An address book?
No.
A passport?
Yes.
An unmarked passport.
A slim, plain blue
rectangle opening
from the bottom
containing
no photo,
no stamps,
no identifying marks.
Yes.
This was hers.

TO KEEP THE DAY
What can we say? It took so little time
There at the end: we watched a record earthquake
Bury schoolhouses full of silent children,
Three hurricanes demolish our vacation
Spots-hectares of trees flattened like slicked hair,
Cities in the Atlantic half-Atlantised-
And epic wildfires conflagrate a state
To slideshow pics of slag-gray parks on Slate,
And those were just the isolate disasters,
Ones we were glad weren't happening to us.
Our autumn bottomed out at ninety-plus
Degrees that year; we died from eating lettuce
And spinach, apples, cheese, and milk; we shot
Each other with our stockpiled guns for reasons
As elemental as inclement seasons;
We even had an asteroid near-miss-
It Could Impact Next Year! as though all this
Were not enough, as though we didn't know
What this all meant when emptily we watched
A paper bag elected president.
But there were things to do: diverting apps,
Web recipes for perfect Caesar wraps,
Hot singles trends on iTunes and on Tinder,
A Netflix mail-bomb flick (Return to Cinder)
Rotten Tomatoes called both dull and tasteless,
Bevies of beauties-clotheless, witless, waistless-
To aid in masturbation, and our regnant
Divas so publicly, divinely pregnant
Is it a shock with so much on our hands-
The flash mobs to promote our favorite brands,
The BOGO drinks at joints with open mics-
We flailed? So little life, so many likes.
We googled moon like blood. We skimmed the hits.
Our search results had strange prerequisites,
And though we double-clicked on The End of the Age,
We only made it partway down the page.
We saw it all-that was our paradigm-
But we saw everything, and all the time.
What else was there to do? The night before,
We toggled our alarm clocks from the news
To triplicated beeps, popped one more beer,
Made sure to bolt the door, and went to bed
When we no longer could resist the yawning.
We'd get the gist by reading the reviews.
When that day came, to keep that day from dawning,
We stirred and chose the last thing we could choose,
Glad-grateful, even-someone had designed
A be-all, end-all button. Groan. Stretch. Snooze.

LITTLE MOVIES
I'm telling my friend Charlotte that Barbara and I
are going to New York, where I hope not to spend
a whole lot of money in fancy restaurants, and Charlotte tells me
she was just in New York herself but didn't
spend much money on food because I was with
a group of pregnant women. I can see them now as they
decide between the goat cheese salad and the hummus,
the hearts of palm and the orange-glazed shrimp with
spicy walnut crumble as the waiter says, Can I interest
you ladies in a mimosa, bloody mary, glass of prosecco?
and they say, No, not this time, maybe in a few months.
Barbara asked her hairdresser if she plans to have
children, and the hairdresser says she's leaning
the other way because she works on a lot of young
mommies, and they're just not selling it. Then again,
parenthood isn't about joy. Studies show that parents
report significantly lower levels of happiness,
life satisfaction, marital satisfaction, and mental well-being
compared with non-parents. Why do it, then? Why
have children at all? Probably because children add
narrative to a life that doesn't have one or add more
narrative to a life that is actually pretty rich in narrative
already or seems as though it may never have
a narrative at all. Did you know that even aliens
love stories? The woman who claims to have
interviewed the alien whose ship crashed in Roswell,
New Mexico, in nineteen forty seven said the creature's favorite books
were Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, Don Quixote,
and One Thousand and One Nights, all stories
of great spirit, great power. Great images: Tom Petty
says, A good song should give you a lot of images.
You should be able to make your own little movie
in your head to a good song, and the same is true
of stories. A man had a peacock, says playwright
Tom Stoppard, and the man was shaving one morning,
and in the mirror he sees the peacock atop the garden wall
and about to jump to the other side, so the man drops
his razor and races out just as the bird reaches
the motorway and starts to leg it to god knows where,
and he catches it after a hundred yards or so and puts
the peacock under his arm and starts home.
So the story ends happily, but in the meantime, a good
half-dozen cars have sped by, and their occupants
have seen a man clad only in pajama pants, his face
covered by shaving foam, carrying a peacock.
What did they think? That the man had lost a bet
on a rugby match, perhaps, and now he has to walk
from Whitby to Berwick-upon-Tweed with the foam
on his face and the bird under his arm. Or that he belongs
to a cult religion that worships shaving, partial nudity,
and peacocks, and he's on his annual pilgrimage.
Or that he has been slipped a powerful drug by his wife's
lover, who is sending the man out into the world
this way so that he will appear deranged and spend
the rest of his days in a care home while the two lovers
squander the man's considerable fortune. All lives
end the same way. Between the start and the finish,
it's the stories that count. May we all say what the poet
Edward Field did when his partner of long standing died,
and Field tells us that "we were together for fifty-eight years.
It was so wonderful I don't mind being by myself for a while
and reflecting on our life together. I am so grateful."
Charlotte laughs as she tells me about her pregnant friends,
and I love thinking of all that life around the table, and then
I ask Charlotte if she plans to have children, and she wags
her finger at me as if to say, wouldn't you like to know.

SUSURRATION
Like a snake, the belt slides
the loops, hissing down and down
again years later. Across an ocean,
an entire continent, my brother's
heart lashes inside the walls
of his chest, pumping blood
through splitting seams. The same
strap, the one that burnt like
fire across my back-it cracks
and breaks now inside him. Our
father, the buckle in his palm,
raised his arm-I wish I could
say only once-at his children,
bellowed at the woman beside him.
A man, a boy really, he just wanted
to play ball and spit from the pitcher's
mound. But he was our father, and he
was his father and all the fathers
before him, filled with a boy's ache
to run. There were the women though,
the children, the moments one after
another. The fathers, they were meant
to know the answers. But they didn't.
And I don't. And now I have this scar,
a wound I think is healed until
the sheets slide across my back,
and I watch my lover
loosen
his belt.

AN ABECEDARIAN FOR THE UNMENTIONABLE
About the time I turned twenty
babies began looking cute. When my future looks empty, I imagine someday
cuddling my own baby to my chest and feeling her new and tiny heartbeat
drum against mine. So much possibility and hope in
eight pounds. For a minute the world shrinks. I
forget that life is complicated and sometimes bleak. The earth rotates at twenty-three point five degrees, and the heaviness of my heart sometimes makes it tilt a little more, but my baby in my arms
giggles, and there is nothing more pressing than letting her wrap her fingers around my thumb.
Hi
I mumble in a language she does not yet understand. And
just how much beauty is in that? In the naivety of not yet knowing. In all the peacefulness of not yet
knowing all that there is to know and fear and cry about. There is something grimly optimistic about holding my baby.
Like she is the answer to the great search of my life. And maybe, despite all the ways I have messed up and all the ways I still can, I created something more than myself.
My friends and I used to complain about our periods. Hoping to get out of gym class, and lie in the
nurse's office. The blood between our thighs
our burden and excuse. But about the time I turned 20, I felt comfort in my
period, and I
quit hating my body, grateful for the width of my hips, that gateway to hope and reason. Life is scary, and I am not good at much, but I know how to love, and I could
raise what the world might need. What I need. But life is also cruel,
so when my blood spills down my legs and pools at my ankles, understand that it is mocking me.
That it is heavy and thick and sometimes does not come for three months. That it is the result of a war happening in my
uterus between the future I want versus the future I get. A
virgin got pregnant and gave birth to a healthy baby boy in a dirty stable and someone please tell me
why is giving birth referred to as "The Miracle of Life" when it seems every other
XY chromosome sculpted by God to create life can do that like it is ordinary. Even by accident. The Miracle should be me:
young but defective. A walking contradiction. I miss being 20 and ignorant. Now, since the thought of my future no longer fills me with that hope, I like to pretend that in another dimension I am more
Zen than this. That I walk around with my eight-pound-baby girl, and my world is shrunk to her size, and everything is okay. And the future I want wants me back.

LIFE BEFORE THE INTERNET
Life before the internet
was quite a bore, let's not forget;
you'd talk about the weather and
assume that boredom's what God planned;
there really wasn't much to do
besides farming and hear cows moo;
now, certes, there was beer to drink
and lutes to strum, at least I think;
at night you could always make love
and hope kids you're enamored of;
but mainly it was lots of toil
except those assholes born royal;
now, life before the internet
was, neighbor, is the mail here yet?
but then, most people couldn't read-
without Facebook, what was the need?
The days were long, the nights were cold
and porridge, friend, was nine days old;
the holidays were poorly run
since churches made sure they weren't fun;
you'd ask your buddies what was new-
quotha, 'there's a war to go to';
there wasn't much but next of kin
unless you'd survive the famine;
there were plague houses everywhere
and shortages of underwear;
ye tweeted not, nor instagrammed,
ye went to sermons, or be damned;
the middle ages were a bore-
just google it if you're not sure;
yes, life before the internet
was lame, just like tonight's sunset;
thank goodness we're all more advanced
and staring at cartoons, entranced.

THE WHALE WATCHERS
We were ecotourists
for the day, paid a hefty
fee to watch the famed
humpbacks at their brilliant
synchronized display,
an orchestration from
beneath of the most amazing
feeding show on Earth,
a behavior which, as our
guide, a marine biologist,
explained, is not instinct
but something learned
and more passed on.
From which free exchange
of knowledge, from whale
to whale, we must infer
that there exists among
these cetaceans, a culture-
evolving as it archives
a collective repository
of shared knowledge they
deploy against changes
inflicted on their habitat
by humans, in a kind of cross-
species rebalancing act.
The bay was green and flat
as a stage, rimmed by
a coast brushed up with brushy
pines, the weather clear
on all sides. When the first
call out came Two o'clock!
we turned in unison
to look and caught sight
of the enormous spectacle-
a pod of giant mouths
launching up-as from
some invisible trap door,
to gulp down hoards of
herring expertly corralled-
then sinking back as quick
as they appeared, a squabble
of seagulls scrambling for
fish scraps in their wake.
And on the upward surge,
how inexplicably our
emotions surged up, too,
fed by exhalations,
a veritable chorus
of cries punctuated by
interjections, then
a smattering of applause,
as for a firework's finale's
final bow. A glittering lull.
And then, as if to oblige,
the grand sight repeated
for a second and third show,
each time in a different spot
of the bay, our guide assuring us
we were lucky to get
an encore so magnanimous,
which brightened the mood
of all on deck we'd gotten our
money's worth, no doubt!,
amateur nature photographers
proudly showing what images
they'd captured on their
spectacular iPhone displays.
Everything was satisfactory,
our young guide clearly
pleased the whales had been
amenable, his smile betraying
a complicit hand, as it were,
in the negotiated deal.
Then in the clear air
above us-we felt a shift,
a change in atmosphere,
stirred by an agitation
among seagulls on the edge
of alarm, the circling
body in flight tightening,
with mews and cries,
as wings tensed like bows
and down the gulls dove;
and up from the green sea
another flock drove up,
breaking surface-little silver
splinters leaping, wiggling
flickering in panicked flight,
driven up from the depths
on a boiling cloud,
and then, just port side,
too close, Oh God, a surge-
the mouths, cavernous
and truly monstrous,
like a clutch of mutant
bivalves, blindly opening,
clapping shut, as seagulls
squawked and green water
churned and foamed,
a cauldron of feeding and
frenzy so close it rocked
the boat. Screams-half glee,
half terror-in musical
riot rose, one excitable
woman pronouncing
upon it all the names
of our risen Lord,
as a squall of seagulls
descended, in a great cloud
of feeders. And just as
suddenly as they appeared,
the whales were gone,
the churning boiler went flat;
a straggling gull got down
his gullet the last fish.
A giddy calm ensued,
then conversations, in high-
pitched, excited voices
-what was seen, what it meant,
chewed over with wonder
and surmise, the motley
crowd of us awakened, eyes
-wilder yet subtler-seeing
that what we'd taken to be
mere spectacle, ingenious
display of that capacity
in face of shifting pressures, not for
adaption, merely, but invention
and redesign, such that
the creature's very nature
is elevated to a new kind
of mind, rebalancing
the precarious equation
by which we all, in this shared
economy, either perish
or thrive was, in fact, encounter
with culture the equal
to our own, a communal
music and movement
created out of ritual as deep
as any need to survive.
It was all of a piece, to which
a coda was now appended
when out of the blue
the first blowhole piped-
then another and
another, like a wheezy
slow-motion calliope
on an old riverboat
toting passengers down
and away, each plume of mist
hovering with a vaguely
valedictory air-
like a sailing white
kerchief. A single fluked tail
flapped like a wing, then
a hand, as the whole roving
herd rolled on, down
migratory roads, through
peaceable blue worlds, where,
suspended as in a dream,
they roam and feed and sleep
and sometimes sing.

STAR SIGNS
Luna sits on the bed, taller than last summer, tan legs
dangling over the edge. You're a Scorpion, like me,
she says, when I tell her my birthday. That's right,
I say. At school in Oaxaca, she has a nemesis
named Oasis, pronounced Oh-ah-sees. She tells me
about it, bouncing up and down on the worn mattress.
Before they were enemies, she says, they were
best friends. Maybe you'll be friends again one day,
I suggest, but she shakes her head. I don't think so.
She tells me about her other friends, Sofia, Lucia.
I'm popular, Luna explains, and with a flush I remember
what those first loves felt like: all the girls I knew
by heart and wanted so badly to impress.
The pair of black patent leather sneakers
my mother bought me, which squeaked when I walked
and which I was too shy to wear until one day
I got up the nerve, and Kelsey Tucker, the most popular
girl in fifth grade, said, Cool sneakers, and suddenly I was in.
By middle school it was all over. I was too nerdy,
too desperate for attention from my teachers.
My mother bought my clothes one size too big
so I would always be comfortable, and when
I ran into my old friends in the bathroom,
sucking in their stomachs to get their pants
zipped up all the way, I was embarrassed.
I still wore jeans from Limited Too that sagged
in the butt, and t-shirts that announced all the tourist
destinations my father had taken us the previous summer:
Niagara Falls! said one. Luray Caverns! said another.
The other girls didn't wear t-shirts anymore.
They wore halters so you could see their bras.
They liked being looked at. Didn't they know boys
would hurt them, I wondered. Didn't they know
that boys thought awful thoughts. I knew it
without being told, and wore big sweaters
so they wouldn't look at my chest. Luna kicks at the bed.
Are you listening? she says, and I tune back in
to a story about a beach trip with her friends,
and the boys she hates. When I mention
my own boyfriend her face twists and her blue eyes
go steely. Who is he? she asks, barely veiling
her jealousy. You'd like him, I say, but it's clear
she's already made up her mind. I'll be thirteen
in November, she says, eager to change the subject.
Maybe you can come for my birthday party.
I imagine boarding a plane, cruising south over
sun-drenched hills, red flowers dotting the valley.
Luna in a blue dress. That would be nice, I say.
Through the window behind her, the lake glimmers.
Rows of apple trees on the opposite shore
glow in the light. I don't ask her
if she remembers the move to Mexico,
the day her mother boarded the plane and flew her
away from her father. In the few months each summer
he has custody, I don't blame him for trying to win her
over, giving her the biggest bedroom
in the house, building her a pool in the middle
of the orchard, buying her whatever she wants.
Though her eyes are set wide in her face,
and mine are close together, though she is small
for twelve, and I was tall, we look alike.
We have the same broad nose and blue eyes,
as if we were burned by the same star
when we were born. I take a photo of her
standing in the bedroom with the pink wallpaper.
The lake ripples like a silver backdrop,
the kind they drape behind you for a school photo.
Later, we play Scrabble against "the adults."
She and I are a team, and when we lose
she flips the board and storms out of the room.
Who does that remind you of, my father says,
and laughs. I find her by the water, sulking,
and in an attempt to cheer her up, find myself
making promises I know I can't keep.
I'll come visit for your birthday, I say.
I'll write you every month. But when I fly back
to Los Angeles, I forget to write. Life tumbles in.
It's September when the earthquake hits Oaxaca.
My phone buzzes in the silent room, my heart jolts
when I see the headline. Biggest earthquake
in a century, it says. I text everyone I can think of,
then move through my apartment as if I'm the one
darkness has settled down on, waiting to hear
that Luna is safe. An hour passes. Then another.
What is it like, I wonder, when that first bolt
breaks loose off the coast? What does she think
when the Earth doesn't stop, but keeps buckling
beneath her, and she wakes inside the full force
of that rift, so sudden, so deep, and does she know,
though she is only a day older, how from then on
everything will be different.

IN WHICH I GET OUT OF A SPEEDING TICKET
It was hard to find the courthouse tucked as it was down
behind the orchard. Porches and pleasant porticoes
as if someone were living there.
Or had. Not far from us, the lake shining and slapping
on shore. Boats going past. There were folding chairs
set out for the defendants and their families.
I'd been caught coming across the bridge; my girlfriend
caressing my hair and both of us laughing at the time.
There were dings in the car from grandfather
back when I was a child and this was his car.
Half-blind, me in the back seat, Pop-pop driving,
cracking into things. I scrambled into the front
hoping to stomp on the brake, but my legs
were too short to be of use. It's like any other thing
kids do in the company of grown-ups. That moment
when you see it's not going to be alright.
Somehow we got home okay that day. I was
recently mentioning this to my grown
daughter. How the Lincoln got the dents.
That at the beginning of your life you don't know
what's going on, and then, like my grandfather
toward the end, not a clue, but going the other way.
I'd been speeding on the bridge, yes. But not
much. In court, I pleaded my innocence.
This was after the men in orange suits
arrived at the building and lined up along
the file cabinets. A young woman with a
child in her arms got up to greet her manacled
boyfriend. He took his baby daughter, held her
in the circle of the cuffs. Some cooing
and nuzzling like nothing had gone wrong
and was going to go on going wrong.
Teenagers really. Still skinny. Complexions
blotchy. The chuckling sound the baby made
when Dad shifted her in his arms.
Little bubble of milk on her lips.

DEAR PAYASWINI
I found your recipe
online
and I have some concerns
well first of all
and my husband raped me three weeks ago
your recipe calls but I don't have any
and I have completely stopped crying
and why did I look for recipes online
why don't I remember how to make this
have you ever had this problem
have you ever forgotten your own recipes
and if I use milk powder in place
will it be too dry
will they fall apart in syrup
my children depend on wholeness
and what if I make them but don't taste them
will they still be sweet
will I be able to cry if I roll them right
will they teach me to name my truths
will they stand my rage without crumbling
just how much can these take
and what if I turn them into something else entirely
how do I change the substance of them
what if instead of cooking them
I take them outside and put them on fallen leaves
for crows to eat
have you ever had this problem
have you ever started
and been afraid

TIRUPATI
in India lies the Temple
situated upon a hill where devotees
flock from all over the world to climb. I used to pass
by the stairs leading up to this hill every day and watch
as the first rays of sunlight softly crept up all steps
as if on pilgrimage for some higher meaning. my grandma
used to tell me that I would miss this place once I leave,
that people come from all over the world to climb the
summit I pass by every day, as if they all carried questions
tied to their backs and only the top held the answer.
I told her they were foolish for doing it.
she told me I was like the sun
that is raised in the East
only to settle in the West.
there's a way in which you wake up each morning,
as if the world hides inside the corners of your mouth
waiting for dawn to break.
you remind me of home-
of bent backs and softly folded hands,
of Sanskrit chants and hopeful hearts,
of believers and of those who no longer do.
I asked my grandma once,
what do all these people expect to find at the top?
she laughed and said,
they come out here to leave their questions behind.
now I know that you and I don't believe in gods as
much as we believe in the sky and everything she
holds, but the way the morning hides behind the
sleeping mountain of your body has me believe that
maybe we are all on a journey to answer the heaviness
tied upon our backs, and perhaps the journey is in
leaving it all behind.
I guess what I am really trying to say is, I think the
sun goes to sleep every night with a new question
tied to her back, and I think you have always been
the place she goes to find her answer.

SEIGE MACHINERY
Dusk slides beneath her dress,
creeps across her thighs, slips
over the rise of her belly.
Night gathers in the hollow
at the base of her throat.
I know she hears knives sharpening
when I unzip her,
the dress down-fountaining
over bare feet. I can vanish
into the dark small of her back,
my bristled chin plowing
down its single row.
But there are places I dare not touch.
The timpani behind a knee,
the bowstring throat, a taut
and fluted ankle:
each an old crime scene
still taped off.
Yet, she has learned to open,
guiding the hot blades
of my hands into untouched places
that burn with their own furnaces.
I don't pretend to be a healer,
bring only my glinting hook of need
to open her ribs, crack through
the gristle of her assembled face.
She is gravid
with the bodies of old lovers.
With them, I move inside her
waiting to set the city on fire.
